Score-based Voting
==================

As we saw in the introductory notebook, in addition to ranking-based
voting, there are also a host of election systems that make use of
score-based ballots. By the end of this section, you should be
comfortable with score ballots, Rating elections, and Cumulative
elections and generators.

Score ballots
-------------

First, let’s revisit how to define score ballots.

.. code:: ipython3

    from votekit import Ballot
    
    score_ballot = Ballot(scores = {"A":4, "B": 3, "C":4}, weight = 3)
    print(score_ballot)
    print("ranking:", score_ballot.ranking)


.. parsed-literal::

    Scores
    A: 4.00
    B: 3.00
    C: 4.00
    Weight: 3
    ranking: None


Notice that despite the scores inducing the ranking :math:`A,C>B`, the
ballot only knows the scores. This is to conceptually separate score
ballots from ranking ballots. If you want to convert a score ballot to a
ranking, you can use the ``score_dict_to_ranking`` function from the
``utils`` module.

.. code:: ipython3

    from votekit.utils import score_dict_to_ranking
    
    ranking=score_dict_to_ranking(score_ballot.scores)
    print(ranking)
    
    ranked_ballot = Ballot(ranking = ranking, weight = score_ballot.weight)
    print(ranked_ballot)


.. parsed-literal::

    (frozenset({'A', 'C'}), frozenset({'B'}))
    Ranking
    1.) A, C, (tie)
    2.) B, 
    Weight: 3


If you had an entire profile of score ballots and wanted to convert them
all to ranked, you could do so as follows.

.. code:: ipython3

    from votekit import PreferenceProfile
    score_profile = PreferenceProfile(ballots = [Ballot(scores = {"A":4, "B": 3, "C":4}, weight = 3),
                                      Ballot(scores = {"A":2, "B": 3, "C":4}, weight = 2),
                                      Ballot(scores = {"A":1, "B": 5, "C":4}, weight = 5),
                                      Ballot(scores = {"A":0, "B": 2, "C":0}, weight = 3)])
    
    print("Score profile\n",score_profile)
    
    ranked_ballots = [Ballot(ranking = score_dict_to_ranking(b.scores),
                            weight = b.weight) 
                    for b in score_profile.ballots]
    
    ranked_profile = PreferenceProfile(ballots = ranked_ballots)
    
    
    print("Ranked profile\n", ranked_profile)


.. parsed-literal::

    Score profile
     Ranking                   Scores Weight
         () (A:1.00, B:5.00, C:4.00)      5
         () (A:4.00, B:3.00, C:4.00)      3
         ()                (B:2.00,)      3
         () (A:2.00, B:3.00, C:4.00)      2
    Ranked profile
                   Ranking Scores Weight
                (B, C, A)     ()      5
    ({'A', 'C'} (Tie), B)     ()      3
                     (B,)     ()      3
                (C, B, A)     ()      2


Score ballots are flexible enough to allow any non-zero score, including
negative scores. Scores of 0 are dropped from the dictionary. Note that
not all election methods support negative scoring, but these elections
in ``VoteKit`` validate your ballots and will raise a ``TypeError`` if
an invalid score is passed.

.. code:: ipython3

    score_ballot = Ballot(scores = {"A":-1, "B": 3.14159, "C":0}, weight = 3)
    print(score_ballot)


.. parsed-literal::

    Scores
    A: -1.00
    B: 3.14
    Weight: 3


Rating Election
---------------

In a Rating election, to fill :math:`m` seats, voters score each
candidate independently from :math:`0-L`, where :math:`L` is some
user-specified limit. The :math:`m` winners are those with the highest
total score.

.. code:: ipython3

    from votekit.elections import Rating
    
    score_profile = PreferenceProfile(ballots = [Ballot(scores = {"A":4, "B": 3, "C":4}, weight = 3),
                                      Ballot(scores = {"A":2, "B": 3, "C":4}, weight = 2),
                                      Ballot(scores = {"A":1, "B": 5, "C":4}, weight = 5),
                                      Ballot(scores = {"A":0, "B": 2, "C":0}, weight = 3)])
    
    # elect 1 seat, each voter can rate candidates up to 5 points independently
    election = Rating(score_profile, m = 1, L = 5)
    print(election)


.. parsed-literal::

          Status  Round
    B    Elected      1
    C  Remaining      1
    A  Remaining      1


Let’s look at the score totals to convince ourselves B was the winner.

.. code:: ipython3

    print(election.election_states[0].scores)


.. parsed-literal::

    {'A': Fraction(21, 1), 'B': Fraction(46, 1), 'C': Fraction(40, 1)}


Now let’s see that the Rating election validates our profile before
running the election. All of these code blocks should raise
``TypeError``\ s.

.. code:: ipython3

    ranking_profile = PreferenceProfile(ballots = [Ballot(ranking= [{"A"}, {"B"}, {"C"}])])
    
    # should raise a TypeError since this profile has no scores
    try:
        election = Rating(ranking_profile, m = 1, L = 5)
    except Exception as e:
        print(f"Found the following error:\n\t{e.__class__.__name__}: {e}")


.. parsed-literal::

    Found the following error:
    	TypeError: All ballots must have score dictionary.


.. code:: ipython3

    negative_profile = PreferenceProfile(ballots = [Ballot(scores = {"A":-1, "B": 3.14159, "C":0})])
    
    # should raise a TypeError since this profile has negative score
    try:
        election = Rating(negative_profile, m = 1, L = 5)
    except Exception as e:
        print(f"Found the following error:\n\t{e.__class__.__name__}: {e}")


.. parsed-literal::

    Found the following error:
    	TypeError: Ballot Scores
    A: -1.00
    B: 3.14
    Weight: 1 must have non-negative scores.


.. code:: ipython3

    over_L_profile = PreferenceProfile(ballots = [Ballot(scores = {"A":0, "B": 10, "C":1})])
    
    # should raise a TypeError since this profile has score over 5
    try:
        election = Rating(over_L_profile, m = 1, L = 5)
    except Exception as e:
        print(f"Found the following error:\n\t{e.__class__.__name__}: {e}")


.. parsed-literal::

    Found the following error:
    	TypeError: Ballot Scores
    B: 10.00
    C: 1.00
    Weight: 1 violates score limit 5 per candidate.


Cumulative election
-------------------

In a Cumulative election, voters can score each candidate as in a Rating
election, but have a total budget of :math:`m` points, where :math:`m`
is the number of seats to be filled. This means candidates cannot be
scored independently, the total must sum to no more than :math:`m`.

Winners are those with highest total score. Giving a candidate multiple
points is known as “plumping” the vote.

.. code:: ipython3

    from votekit.elections import Cumulative
    
    score_profile = PreferenceProfile(ballots = [Ballot(scores = {"A":2, "B": 0, "C":0}, weight = 3),
                                      Ballot(scores = {"A":1, "B": 1, "C":0}, weight = 2),
                                      Ballot(scores = {"A":0, "B": 0, "C":2}, weight = 5),
                                      Ballot(scores = {"A":0, "B": 2, "C":0}, weight = 4)])
    
    # elect 2 seat, each voter can rate candidates up to 2 points total
    election = Cumulative(score_profile, m = 2)
    print(election)
    print(election.get_ranking())
    print(election.election_states[0].scores)


.. parsed-literal::

          Status  Round
    B    Elected      1
    C    Elected      1
    A  Remaining      1
    (frozenset({'B', 'C'}), frozenset({'A'}))
    {'A': Fraction(8, 1), 'B': Fraction(10, 1), 'C': Fraction(10, 1)}


Here, B and C tied for 10 points and are thus elected in the same set.

Again, the Cumulative class does validation for us.

.. code:: ipython3

    over_m_profile = PreferenceProfile(ballots = [Ballot(scores = {"A":0, "B": 2, "C":1})])
    
    # should raise a TypeError since this profile has total score over 2
    try:
        election = Cumulative(over_m_profile, m = 2)
    except Exception as e:
        print(f"Found the following error:\n\t{e.__class__.__name__}: {e}")


.. parsed-literal::

    Found the following error:
    	TypeError: Ballot Scores
    B: 2.00
    C: 1.00
    Weight: 1 violates total score budget 2.


Cumulative generator
--------------------

We have a ballot generator that generates cumulative style ballots from
a preference interval. It samples with replacement, thus allowing for
the possibility that you give one candidate multiple points (this is
known as “plumping”).

.. code:: ipython3

    import votekit.ballot_generator as bg
    from votekit import PreferenceInterval
    
    m = 2
    bloc_voter_prop = {"all_voters": 1}
    slate_to_candidates= {"all_voters": ["A", "B", "C"]}
    
    # the preference interval (80,15,5)
    pref_intervals_by_bloc = {"all_voters":  
                              {"all_voters": PreferenceInterval({"A": .80,  "B": .15,  "C": .05})}
                              }
    
    cohesion_parameters = {"all_voters": {"all_voters": 1}}
    
    # the num_votes parameter says how many total points the voter is given
    # for a cumulative election, this is m, the number of seats
    # in a limited election, this could be less than m
    cumu = bg.name_Cumulative(pref_intervals_by_bloc = pref_intervals_by_bloc,
                         bloc_voter_prop = bloc_voter_prop,
                         slate_to_candidates = slate_to_candidates,
                         cohesion_parameters=cohesion_parameters,
                          num_votes=m)
    
    profile = cumu.generate_profile(number_of_ballots = 100)
    print(profile)


.. parsed-literal::

    Ranking           Scores Weight
         ()        (A:2.00,)     61
         () (A:1.00, B:1.00)     24
         () (A:1.00, C:1.00)     12
         ()        (B:2.00,)      1
         () (C:1.00, B:1.00)      1
         ()        (C:2.00,)      1


Verify that the ballots make sense given the interval. A should receive
the most votes.

.. code:: ipython3

    Cumulative(profile, m)




.. parsed-literal::

          Status  Round
    A    Elected      1
    B    Elected      1
    C  Remaining      1



**Try it yourself**
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

   Change the preference interval and rerun the election. Does the
   profile make sense?

Conclusion
----------

You have now seen score ballots, Rating elections, and Cumulative
elections and generators. ``VoteKit`` also implements Limited elections,
as well as approval elections, which are like score-based elections but
each candidate can only be scored 0 or 1.

